## Page 1

State-space fading memory

Gustave Bainier(^{a,*}), Antoine Chaillet(^{b}), Rodolphe Sepulchre(^{c,d}), Alessio Franci(^{a,e,*}) (^{a})Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Liège, 10 allée de la Découverte, Liège, 4000, Belgium (^{b})Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, CentraleSupélec, Laboratoire des signaux et systèmes, Gif-sur-Yvette, 91190, France (^{c})KU Leuven, Department of Electrical Engineering (ESAT), STADIUS Center for Dynamical Systems, Signal Processing and Data Analytics, Kasteel Park Arenberg 10, Leuven, 3001, Belgium (^{d})Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, United Kingdom (^{e})WEL Research Institute, Wavre, 1300, Belgium

Abstract

The fading-memory (FM) property captures the progressive loss of influence of past inputs on a system's current output and has originally been formalized by Boyd and Chua in an operator-theoretic framework. Despite its importance for systems approximation, reservoir computing, and recurrent neural networks, its connection with state-space notions of nonlinear stability, especially incremental ones, remains understudied. This paper introduces a state-space definition of FM. In state-space, FM can be interpreted as an extension of incremental input-to-output stability ((\delta)IOS) that explicitly incorporates a memory kernel upper-bounding the decay of past input differences. It is also closely related to Boyd and Chua's FM definition, with the sole difference of requiring uniform, instead of general, continuity of the memory functional with respect to an input-fading norm. We demonstrate that incremental input-to-state stability ((\delta)ISS) implies FM semi-globally for time-invariant systems under an equibounded input assumption. Notably, Boyd and Chua's approximation theorems apply to delta-ISS state-space models. As a closing application, we show that, under mild assumptions, the state-space model of current-driven memristors possess the FM property. Keywords: Fading Memory, Incremental Input-to-State Stability, Incremental Input-to-Output Stability 1. Introduction 1.1. Fading memory and the representation of stable systems

Fading-Memory (FM), introduced by Stephen P. Boyd and Leon O. Chua, is an incremental stability property of input-output (I/O) systems, where the current outputs depend on past inputs, but the influence of older inputs gradually diminishes. Boyd and Chua showed that a large class of FM operators can be approximated arbitrarily well by a linear time-invariant state-space model followed by a nonlinear static readout:

\dot{x}(t) = A x(t) + B u(t), \quad (1a) y(t) = g(x(t)), \quad (1b) with ( u ) and ( y ) the input and output signals respectively. The state matrix ( A ) is Hurwitz and the static readout ( g ) is smooth, ensuring both internal and external stability [1]. This result effectively provides a canonical representation of FM operators. However, it applies in the operator-theoretic context and does not directly translate to nonlinear state-space systems theory. For linear systems, the situation is simpler: Boyd and Chua have established a convolution theorem, stating that Linear Time-Invariant (LTI) operators have FM if and only if they admit a convolution representation [1]. This makes FM an almost automatic property of LTI systems in engineering practice. LTI systems with FM enjoy well-known I/O properties. such as Bounded-Input Bounded-Output (BIBO), Converging-Input Converging-Output (CICO), and Periodic-Input Periodic-Output (PIPO). In contrast, for nonlinear systems, the notions of representation, internal stability, and external stability are largely decoupled. For state-space nonlinear systems, classical asymptotic stability concerns only the internal dynamics (convergence to an equilibrium in the absence of input) and does not automatically imply well-behaved I/O behaviors, nor vice-versa. Stronger stability notions are therefore required. One such a notion is incremental input-to-state stability ((\delta)ISS), which implies internal asymptotic stability, and I/O properties analogous to linear systems: namely, BIBO, CICO and PIPO [2, 3, 4]. Moreover, (\delta)ISS is preserved under I/O interconnections satisfying a small-gain condition, making it particularly powerful for analyzing large-scale nonlinear systems [2]. However, unlike FM systems, (\delta)ISS does not readily provide a canonical representation theorem similar to Boyd and Chua's approximation result. A state-space stability notion that recovers Boyd and Chua's FM is needed in order to apply their approximation result to nonlinear state-space models. This paper introduces this missing state-space FM notion. Rather unsurprisingly, state-space FM closely relates to the notion of (\delta)ISS. We show that, under equibounded inputs, (\delta)ISS implies the state-space FM property semi-globally, offering a simple pathway to generalize Boyd and Chua's representation result to the state-space setting. Our broader objective is to establish state-space FM as a nonlinear system.

## Page 2



## Page 3

2. Notations

A function (\alpha: [0, +\infty) \to [0, +\infty)) is of class (\mathcal{K}) if it is continuous, strictly increasing, and (\alpha(0) = 0). Moreover, it is of class (\mathcal{K}_\infty) is it of class (\mathcal{K}) and (\lim_{r \to \infty} \alpha(r) = +\infty). A function (\beta: [0, +\infty) \times [0, +\infty) \to [0, +\infty)) is of class (\mathcal{K}\mathcal{L}) if it is continuous, and such that for each (s \in [0, +\infty)), (\beta(\cdot, s) \in \mathcal{K}), and for each (r \in [0, +\infty)), (\beta(\cdot, r)) is nonincreasing on ([0, +\infty)) with (\lim_{s \to +\infty} \beta(r, s) = 0). 3. FM for state-space models 3.1. Motivating example: the current-driven memristor

A memristor is a two-terminal electronic device whose resistance, or memristance, (M > 0) varies over time, typically depending on the history of current (I) that has flowed through it, providing its behavior with a built-in memory of past activity [31]. For a memristor, Ohm's law is typically given in state-space representation and reads: (U(t) = M(x(t))I(t)), \quad (2a) (\dot{x}(t) = f(x(t), I(t))). \quad (2b) Equation (2a) resembles the standard (U = RI) relationship of a Ohmic resistor, except that the resistance (R) is replaced by (M), a memristance function, which depends on the internal state (x) of the memristor. The memory effect of the memristance arises from the dynamics of the internal state variable (2b). In many memristor models the influence of past activity gradually diminishes, and the memristor serves as a canonical example of a FM system [32]. While originally, Boyd an Chua defined FM through the continuity of the system operator with respect to a fading norm [1], our formalization highlights the system's retained memory by relying on its input-to-output contraction properties. To gain some intuition, consider two identical memristors driven by two input currents (I_0) and (I_b) that differ before some time (t^*) but become identical thereafter. Because the two devices retain a memory of past inputs, their corresponding voltages (U_a) and (U_b) still differ for (t \geq t^*). However, as time progresses, the influence of the earlier discrepancies between (I_a) and (I_b) fades away, and the two voltages gradually converge toward each other at a rate characterizing the temporal scale of the system's memory. The paper proposes this systematic output contraction in response to input contraction as an alternative way to formalize FM. This definition will ultimately be shown to be closely related to that of Boyd and Chua, thus enabling the use of their original approximation theorem [1]. In particular, if the memristor has FM, then its model can be approximated by a state-space LTI system with a static nonlinear readout, effectively removing the nonlinearity from the dynamical equation (2b) of the original state-space model. Practical conditions for this FM property to hold on the memristor are given at the end of the paper (Section 6). 3.2. Definition

Consider the nonlinear state-space model

\dot{x}(t) = f(x(t), u(t)), \quad (3a) where (x(t) \in \mathbb{R}^{n_s}) is the state of the system, (u \in \mathcal{U}^*\subset L_{\infty}([0,+\infty), \mathbb{R}^{n_s})) is its input (the + superscript in (\mathcal{U}^*) denotes the positive-time domain ([0,+\infty))), and (y(t) \in \mathbb{R}^{n_s}) is its output. It is assumed that (3a) is forward complete, meaning for all initial condition (x(0) \in X_0 \subseteq \mathbb{R}^{n_s}) and input (u \in \mathcal{U}^*), the state trajectory (x) is uniquely defined by (3a) on the maximal interval of existence (t \in [0,+\infty)), and moreover that (g) is continuous so (y \in L_{\infty}([0,+\infty), \mathbb{R}^{n_s})) for all (u \in \mathcal{U}^*).

Intuitively, we propose that (3) has the FM property if:

1. The system is incrementally asymptotically output stable for all input signal (u \in \mathcal{U}^*). This means that for any mismatch of initial conditions (\|x_a(0) - x_b(0)\|), the trajectories of the two outputs, (y_a) and (y_b), considered with a common input signal (u \in \mathcal{U}^*), converge toward each other uniformly across all initial conditions. 2. The system is incrementally input-to-output stable (i.e. (\delta)IOS). This means that for two distinct input signals (u_a) and (u_b \in \mathcal{U}^*), (y_a) and (y_b) still converge to each other, but only up to a mismatch that scales with the maximum past mismatch between (u_a) and (u_b). 3. The system's output gradually forgets its past inputs according to a uniform memory mechanism. This means that the mismatch between (y_a) and (y_b) is computed by weighting past mismatches between (u_a) and (u_b) according to their temporal distance, with respect to a system-specific fading memory kernel. In particular, if (u_a) and (u_b) converge asymptotically to one another, then so do (y_a) and (y_b). Although these three properties were presented sequentially, it should be noted that 3) implies 2) which in turn implies 1). Consequently, a formalization of 3) alone would offer a complete characterization of FM. The memory kernel described in point 3) is defined by a function (w: [0,+\infty) \to [0,1]), with (w(\Delta t)) the decay weight associated to the input mismatch between (u_a) and (u_b) after a time (\Delta t \geq 0). To ensure that the system exhibits FM, the discrepancies in the distant past must have progressively less influence on the present output behavior, as formalized in the following definition. Definition 1 (Memory kernel), A function (w: [0,+\infty) \to [0,1]) is a memory kernel if it is continuous, nonincreasing, and satisfies (\lim_{\Delta t \to +\infty} w(\Delta t) = 0). \quad (4) The formal definition of our state-space FM property is now introduced:

## Page 4

Definition 2 (State-space FM), The system (3) has w-FM if there exists (\beta \in \mathcal{KL}), (\gamma \in \mathcal{K}_{\infty}), and a memory kernel w satisfying Definition 1 such that for any two initial conditions, (x_0(0), x_b(0) \in X_0), considered with two input trajectories, (u_a, u_b \in \mathcal{U}^+), the corresponding outputs satisfy for all (t \geq 0):

(\|y_a(t) - y_b(t)\| \leq \left\| \beta \|(x_a(0) - x_b(0)) \right\|), (5) (+ \gamma (\operatorname{ess}_{\operatorname{sup}_{\in[0,l]} W}(t - s)) \|u_a(s) - u_b(s)\|). Remark 1. A qualitatively equivalent definition of FM is given by:

(\|y_a(t) - y_b(t)\| \leq \max \left( \left\| \beta \right\|(x_a(0) - x_b(0)) \right\|, (6)) (\tilde{\gamma} (\operatorname{ess}_{\operatorname{sup}_{\in[0,l]} W}(t - s)) \|u_a(s) - u_b(s)\|). Succinctly, (5) implies (6) with ((\tilde{\beta}, \tilde{\gamma}) = (2\beta, 2\gamma)), and (6) implies (5) with ((\beta, \gamma) = (\tilde{\beta}, \tilde{\gamma})). This is essentially a δIOS property with the addition of a input-fading mechanism. Definition 3 (Input-to-state FM). Succinctly, we define input-to-state FM as our state-space notion of FM with respect to the output (y = x). This is essentially a δISS property with the addition of a input-fading mechanism. 3.3. Elementary results using the memory kernel

Similarly to most comparison functions in control, the memory kernel (w(\Delta t)) provides an upper-bound on the influence of past inputs on the current output. It is therefore not uniquely defined. A memory kernel satisfying inequality (5) offers an a priori conservative characterization of the system's memory constraints: the system may, in fact, be more forgetful than the memory kernel suggests. This ensures that the continuity and nonincreasing requirements of Definition 1 are obtained without loss of generality. This idea is formalized in the following proposition and corollary:

(\text{Proposition 1} (w_1 \leq w_2 \Rightarrow (w_1 - \text{FM} \Rightarrow w_2 - \text{FM})).) Let the system (3) have (w_1 - \text{FM}). The system (3) also has (w_2 - \text{FM}) for any memory kernel (w_2: [0, +\infty) \rightarrow [0, 1]) satisfying (\lim_{\Delta t \to +\infty} w_2(\Delta t) = 0) and such that for all (\Delta t \geq 0), (w_1(\Delta t) \leq w_2(\Delta t)). Proof. The proof is immediate by upper-bounding (5) in Definition 2. Corollary 1. If (3) has (w_1 - \text{FM}), with (w_1: [0, +\infty) \rightarrow [0, 1]) only satisfying condition (4), then there exists a memory kernel (w_2) satisfying Definition 1 such that the system (3) has (w_2 - \text{FM}). Proof. From Proposition 1, it is sufficient to show that for all (w_1: [0, +\infty) \rightarrow [0, 1]) such that (w_1(x) \to +\infty), there exists a continuous and nonincreasing (w_2: [0, +\infty) \rightarrow [0, 1]) such that (w_2(x) \to +\infty). 0 and (w_2 \geq w_1) pointwise. This is, in fact, a usual result for comparison functions, see Lemma 2 of [33]. One can define (\tilde{w}_x \triangleq \sup_{\geq z} w_1(x)) and obtain such (w_2) from (\tilde{w}) through standard regularization. (\Box) (\Delta y(t) \leq e^{-T/\tau} \|\Delta y(0)\| + 2 \text{ess sup}_{\text{se}[0,1]} e^{-(t-s)/2\tau} \|\Delta u(s)\|). (7) (\text{Similar to the properties of δISS systems (see Proposition 4.4 and Proposition 4.5 in [2]), for FM systems, converging inputs lead to converging outputs (CICO), and periodic inputs lead to periodic outputs (PIPO). The first property is, however, more general than that of δISS systems, since it solely relies on the memory kernel and do not require specific state-space properties (such as time-invariant or delay-free dynamics)). (\text{Proposition 2} (\Delta u(t) \to \Delta y(t) \to 0)). If the FM inequality (5) stands and if (u_a) and (u_b) converge asymptotically to one another, then (y_a) and (y_b) do as well. Proof. Let (u_a, u_b \in \mathcal{U}^+) be such that (\|u_a(t) - u_b(t)\| \to +\infty). Since the input signals are in (L_\infty), there exists (M > 0) such that (\operatorname{ess} \sup_{\tau \geq 0} \|u_a(t) - u_b(t)\| \to +\infty). (\lim_{\tau \to +\infty} \operatorname{ess} \sup_{\tau \in [0,1]} h(t, s) = 0.) Let (\varepsilon > 0). Since (w(t) \to +\infty), there exists (t_1 > 0) such that for all (t \geq t_1), (w(t) \leq \varepsilon / 2M). Similarly, since (\|u_a(t) - u_b(t)\| \to +\infty), there exists (t_2 > 0) such that for all (t \geq t_2), (\|u_a(t) - u_b(t)\| \leq \varepsilon / 2M). The following inequality holds:

(\operatorname{ess} \sup_{\tau \in [0,1]} h(t, s) \leq \operatorname{ess} \sup_{\tau \in [0,1/2]} h(t, s)) (\quad (9)) (\quad + \operatorname{ess} \sup_{\tau \in [1/2,1]} h(t, s)). On one hand, for all (t \geq 2t_1):

(\operatorname{ess} \sup_{\tau \in [0,1/2]} h(t, s) \leq \operatorname{ess} \sup_{\tau \in [0,1/2]} w(t - s) M \leq \frac{\varepsilon}{2}.) (10) On the other hand, for all (t \geq 2t_2):

(\operatorname{ess} \sup_{\tau \in [1/2,1]} h(t, s) \leq \operatorname{ess} \sup_{\tau \in [1/2,1]} \|u_a(s) - u_b(s)\| \leq \frac{\varepsilon}{2}.) (11) Overall, if (t \geq 2 \max(t_1, t_2)), then (\operatorname{ess} \sup_{\tau \in [0,1]} h(t, s) \leq \varepsilon), which demonstrates (8). (\Box) (\text{Proposition 3 (Entrainment by periodic input, Let the system (3) have be bounded-input bounded-state (BIBS) and have FM properties. If the input u is T-periodic, then the output y converges to a T-periodic trajectory, independently of the initial conditions.}) (\text{Proof. Let } u \in \mathcal{U}^+). Since the input signal is in (L_\infty), there exists (M_x > 0) such that (\operatorname{ess} \sup_{\tau \in [0]} \|u(t)\| < M_x). Now consider the trajectory x of initial condition (x(0) \in X_0). The BIBO property implies that there exists (M_x > 0) and (t' > 0) such that for all (t \geq t', \|u(t)\| < M_x). Let (t_1 = t' + k_1 T + \delta) and (t_2 = t' + k_2 T + \delta) with (k_1, k_2 \in \mathbb{N}) and (\delta \in [0, T)). Let us assume without loss of (\Box) (\Delta y(t) \leq e^{-T/\tau} \|\Delta y(0)\| + 2 \text{ess sup}_{\tau \in [0,1]} e^{-(t-s)/2\tau} \|\Delta u(s)\|). (7) (\text{A common choice for the memory kernel is the exponentially decaying function } \Delta(\tau) = e^{-\mu \Delta t}), which arises naturally in exponentially stable linear systems, such as the standard low-pass filter (\tau_j(t) = -y(t) + u(t)), for which the following FM inequality holds:

(\Delta y(t) \leq e^{-\mu \Delta t} \leq \frac{\varepsilon}{2} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{1}{n} \sum_{

## Page 5

generality that ( k_1 \leq k_2 ). An immediate application of the FM inequality (5) to the trajectories obtained with:

(\begin{cases} u_{a,1}(.) \triangleq u(.) + t^* \\ x_{a,1}(.) \triangleq x(.)^\top \end{cases}) (12a) and:

(\begin{cases} u_{b,1}(.) \triangleq u(.) + t^* + (k_2 - k_1)T) \left[ = u(.) + t^* \right] \\ x_{b,1}(.) \triangleq x(.)^\top + (k_2 - k_1)T) \end{cases}) (12b) yields:

(\begin{cases} \|y(t^* + k_1 T + \delta) - y(t^* + k_2 T + \delta)\| & (13) \\ \delta \in (0, T) \\ \end{cases}) (\begin{cases} \beta(\|x(t^*) - x(t^* + (k_2 - k_1)T)\|, k_1 T + \delta) & \quad (12c) \\ + \gamma(\text{ess sup}_{s \in [r, J]} w(t_1 - s) \underbrace{\|u(s) - u(s + (k_2 - k_1)T)\|}_{=0} & (14) \end{cases}) (\begin{cases} \leq \beta(2M_x, k_1 T) \to k_{1 \leftrightarrow 0} \quad \text{and } \quad \text{as } \text{in case } \text{of } \text{the } \text{trajectories } \text{associated with } x_{a,2}(0) \text{ and } x_{b,2}(0) \in X_0. \quad \text{Again, the } \text{FM } \text{in-equality } (5) \text{ yields for all } k \in \mathbb{N}: \\ \|y_{a,2}(t^* + kT + \delta) - y_{b,2}(t^* + kT + \delta)\| & (15) \\ \delta \in [0, T) \quad \text{and } \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \

## Page 6

The properties of time-invariance and causality mean that ( G ) can solely be defined and studied through a memory functional, which maps its input before time ( t = 0 ) to its output at time ( t = 0 ) [1]. We introduce the set ( \mathcal{U}^\perp \triangleq {u^*, u \in \mathcal{U}} ), where ( u^* ) stands for the restriction of the function ( u ) to negative time. ( \mathcal{U}^* ) and ( u^* ) are defined likewise for positive time. A definition for the memory functional of an operator is defined thereafter. Definition 6 (Memory functional), Given the operator ( G: \mathcal{U} \to \mathcal{Y} ), the map ( F_G: \mathcal{U} \to \mathbb{R}^n ) is a memory functional of ( G ) if for all ( u \in \mathcal{U}^* ), there exists ( \bar{u} \in \mathcal{U} ) such that ( \bar{u} = \bar{u}^* ) and ( F_G(u^*) = G(\bar{u})^0 ). At this stage, the definition of a memory functional remains underspecified: the memory functional of an operator is not uniquely defined, nor is the operator uniquely determined by its memory functional. While such memory functionals are not useful in themselves, they serve to demonstrate that time-invariance and causality constitute the minimal assumptions required to guarantee a convenient correspondence between an operator and its associated memory functional. This observation is purely rhetorical in nature. Proposition 6. If ( G: \mathcal{U} \to \mathcal{Y} ) is causal, then ( G ) defines a unique memory functional ( F_G: \mathcal{U}^*} \to \mathbb{R}^n ). Conversely, if ( G: \mathcal{U} \to \mathcal{Y} ) is causal and time-invariant, then the memory functional ( F_G: \mathcal{U}^*} \to \mathbb{R}^n ) uniquely defines ( G ). Proof. First, let us show that a causal ( G ) uniquely defines ( F_G ). Let ( F_G^a ) and ( F_G^b ) be two memory functionals associated with ( G ). Let ( u^- \in \mathcal{U}^a ) and take ( u_a, u_b \in \mathcal{U} ) such that ( u^- = u_a^* = u_b^* ). ( F_G^a(u^*) = G(u_a)(0) ) and ( F_G^b(u^*) = G(u_b)(0) ). By definition of causality (23), ( G(u_a)(t) = G(u_b)(t) ) for all ( t \leq 0 ), so in particular, ( G(u_a)(0) = G(u_b)(0) ), which implies that ( F_G^a(u_a) = F_G^b(u_b) ), and thus ( F_G^a(u^*) = F_G^b(u) ) for all ( u^- \in \mathcal{U}^*, i.e. F_G^a = F_G^b ). Conversely, let us show that if ( G ) is causal and time-invariant, then ( F_G ) uniquely defines ( G ). Let us take ( F_G_a ) and ( F_G_b ) the unique memory functionals associated with two time invariant and causal operators ( G_a ) and ( G_b ). Assuming ( F_G_a = F_G_b ), we have ( G_a(u)(0) = G_b(u)(0) ) for all ( u \in \mathcal{U} ). By the input set in-variance (21), if ( u \in \mathcal{U} ), then for all ( \tau \in \mathbb{R} ), we have ( T_{-} \tau u \in \mathcal{U} ), hence ( G_a(T_{-} \tau)(0) = G_b(T_{-} \tau)(0) ), which is to say, by the operator equivariance (22), ( G_a(u)(\tau) = G_b(u)(\tau) ) for all ( u \in \mathcal{U} ) and ( \tau \in \mathbb{R} ), and thus ( G_a = G_b ). Boyd and Chua's definition of FM relies on this memory functional: an operator ( G ) has FM if its memory functional ( F_G ) is continuous with respect to the w-fading input norm, as formalized hereafter. Definition 7 (FM operator), Let ( G: \mathcal{U} \to \mathcal{Y} ) be a causal and time-invariant operator. ( G ) has FM if there exists a memory kernel w satisfying Definition 1 such that for all ( u_a, u_b \in \mathcal{U}^* ), the memory functional ( F_G: \mathcal{U}^* \to \mathbb{R}^n ) satisfies:

(\forall \varepsilon > 0, \exists \delta > 0, \quad \text{ess sup}_{\varepsilon \leq 0} w(-s) \| u_a(s) - u_b(s) \| < \delta \quad (25) ) (\Rightarrow \| F_G(u_a) - F_G(u_b) \| < \varepsilon.) The state-space definition of FM introduced in Section 3.2 is slightly more contrived than that of Boyd and Chua. Succinctly, the operator theoretic equivalent to our state-space FM definition consists in imposing uniform continuity to the FM operator rather than solely continuity. Although imposing uniform continuity is stronger than continuity, the two notions of FM become identical for well-behaved inputs, by which we mean inputs that are both Lipschitz-continuous and equibounded. Thus, we argue that the two notions are fundamentally equivalent in practice. Definition 8 (Uniform FM operator), Let ( G: \mathcal{U} \to \mathcal{Y} ) be a causal and time-invariant operator. ( G ) has uniform FM if there exists ( \gamma \in \mathcal{K}_{\infty} ) and a memory kernel w satisfying Definition 1 such that for all ( u_a, u_b \in \mathcal{U}^* ), the memory functional ( F_G: \mathcal{U}^* \to \mathbb{R}^{n} ) satisfies:

(\|F_G(u_a) - F_G(u_b)\| \leq \gamma \big(\text{ess sup}_{\varepsilon \leq 0} w(-s) \| u_a(s) - u_b(s) \| \big)). Remark 5. In this context, (\gamma) is called the modulus of continuity of the memory functional (F_G). Remark 6. Similarly to the memory kernel discussed in Section 3.3, the memory kernel introduced in the two definitions hereabove is taken continuous and nonincreasing without loss of generality. Proposition 7 (Well behaved (\mathcal{U}): (FM operator (\Leftrightarrow) Uniform FM operator)), Let ( G: \mathcal{U} \to \mathcal{Y} ) be a causal and time-invariant operator. If there exists ( M, K > 0 ) such that:

(\mathcal{U} \subseteq {u \in L_\infty: \|u(t)\| \leq M, \|u(t) - u(s)\| \leq K |t - s|, \forall t, s \in \mathbb{R}}, (27)) then ( G ) has FM if and only if it has uniform FM. Proof. Following the proof of Lemma 1 in Section 4 of [1], we can show that (\mathcal{U}) is contained in a compact set with respect to the w-fading input norm. The equivalence between FM and uniform FM then follows from the Heine-Cantor theorem, which demonstrates the equivalence between continuity and uniform continuity on compact sets. (\square) We now show the equivalence between the operator-theoretic notion of uniform FM and the state-space notion of FM introduced earlier. To this aim, we need to associate a fixed initial condition ( x_0 \in X_0 ) of the state-space model (3) with a fixed negative-time input ( u_0 \in \mathcal{U}^* ) of the I/O operator ( G ). The formal definition of a ( (x_0, u_0) )-realization is introduced hereafter. Definition 9 ((x_0, u_0)-realization). The causal and time-invariant operator ( G: \mathcal{U} \to \mathcal{Y} ) is a (x_0, u_0)-realization of the state-space model (3) if the negative-time input ( u_0 \in \mathcal{U}^* ) satisfies:

- for all ( u \in \mathcal{U}^* ), the temporal concatenation ( u_0 \circ u ) is an element of (\mathcal{U}); - the output ( y ) of (3) considered at ( x_0 \in X_0 ) and associated with ( u \in \mathcal{U}^* ) satisfies ( y(t) = G(u_0 \circ u)(t) ) for all ( t \geq 0 ). Remark 7. Note that ( G(u_0 \circ u)(t) = F_G((T_{-}r(u_0 \circ u))^-). )

## Page 7

The equivalence between the operator-theoretic notion of uniform FM and the state-space notion of FM can then be stated as follows:

Theorem 1 (Uniform FM operator ↔ State-space FM), Let ( G ):

(\mathcal{U} \rightarrow \mathcal{Y}) be a ((x_0, u_0))-realization of the state-space model (3). The operator (G) has uniform (w)-FM (Definition 8) for all inputs of the form (T_{-i}(u_0 \circ t)), with (u \in \mathcal{U}^*) and (t \geq 0), if and only if the state-space model (3) has (w)-FM (Definition 2) for (X_0 = {x_0}). Proof. Since for all (u_a, u_b \in \mathcal{U}^+) and (t \geq 0), we have:

(\gamma(\text{ess sup}_{x \leq 0} w(-s))|T_{-i}(u_0 \circ u_a)(s) - T_{-i}(u_0 \circ u_b)(s)|\big)) (28) (\quad = \gamma(\text{ess sup}_{x \leq t} w(t-s))|(\mathbf{u}_0 \circ \mathbf{u}_a)(s) - (\mathbf{u}_0 \circ \mathbf{u}_b)(s)|\big)) (\quad = \gamma(\text{ess sup}_{x \in [0,t]} w(t-s))|u_a(s) - u_b(s)|\big)) (29) and (\|\mathbf{y}_a(t) - \mathbf{y}_b(t)\| = \|\mathbf{F}_G((T_{-i}(u_0 \circ u_a))^- - \mathbf{F}_G((T_{-i}(u_0 \circ u_b))^-)\|), the inequalities (26) and (5) are equivalent. (\Box) Since the equivalence is obtained at a fixed (x_0), it does not yet justify the (\mathcal{K}\mathcal{L})-dissipation term (\beta) in Definition 2. An operator-theoretic justification for this term is provided hereafter, although the strict equivalence between the two FM notions is lost. Succinctly, if the I/O operator (G) is a ((x_0, u_0))-realization of the state-space model (3) for a whole set of initial conditions (x_0 \in X_0), with an appropriate negative-time control (u_0 \in \mathcal{U}^-) varying uniformly continuously with respect to the choice of (x_0), then a (\mathcal{K}\mathcal{L})-dissipation term (\beta) can be recovered solely from the operator-theoretic Definition 8 of FM. Assumption 1. Let (\mathcal{U}^-) be equipped with the usual (L_\infty) norm. We assume that there exists a uniformly continuous map (\psi: X_0 \to \mathcal{U}^-), with (\alpha \in \mathcal{K}_\infty) its modulus of continuity, such that for all (x_0 \in X_0), the causal and time-invariant operator (G: \mathcal{U} \to \mathcal{Y}) is a ((x_0, \psi(x_0))-)realization of the state-space model (3) considered at (x_0 \in X_0). Remark 8. In the case where (X_0) is compact, the Heine-Cantor theorem guarantees that solely continuity of (\psi) is required. As an evident example, we can consider once again the standard low-pass filter (\tau_f(t) = -y(t) + u(t)) and its I/O operator realization (G) defined for all (u \in \mathcal{U}) and (t \in \mathbb{R}) by:

(G(u)(t) \triangleq \frac{1}{\tau} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} e^{-(t-s)/\tau} u(s) ds.) (31) Taking (\psi(x_0) \triangleq 1_{\leq 0} x_0) over the domain (X_0 = \mathbb{R}), with (1_{\leq 0}) the constant negative-time function of value 1, we can easily verify that (\psi) is uniformly continuous, and that for all (u \in \mathcal{U}^+) and (t \geq 0):

(G(\psi(x_0) \circ u)(t) = e^{-t/\tau} x_0 + \frac{1}{\tau} \int_0^\infty e^{-(t-s)/\tau} u(s) ds = y(t)), (32) so Assumption 1 holds globally. Given this assumption, the (\mathcal{K}\mathcal{L})-dissipation of initial conditions is recovered as follows:

Proposition 8 (Uniform FM operator ⇒ State-space FM), Under Assumption 1, if (G) has uniform (w)-FM (Definition 8) for all inputs in (\bigcup_{j \geq 0} T_{-i}(\psi(x_0) \circ \mathcal{U}^-)), then the state-space model (3) has (w)-FM (Definition 2) on (X_0). Proof. Let (x_0, a, x_0, b \in \mathcal{X}_0^+). The outputs of the state-space model (3) associated with these initial conditions and inputs are denoted (y_a) and (y_b) respectively. Under Assumption 1, the following equality holds for all (t \geq 0):

(\|\mathbf{y}_a(t) - \mathbf{y}_b(t)\|) (\quad = \|F_G((T_{-i}(\psi(x_0,a) \circ u_a))^-) - F_G((T_{-i}(\psi(x_0,b) \circ u_b))^-)\|), thus, if (G) has uniform FM, then the following inequality stands for all (t \geq 0):

(\|\mathbf{y}_a(t) - \mathbf{y}_b(t)\|) (\quad \leq \gamma\left(\max_{x \in [0,t]} w(t-s)\|\psi(x_0,a)(s) - \psi(x_0,b)(s)\|\right)). (35) By uniform continuity of (\psi), the inequality (\operatorname{ess sup}_{x \in [0,t]} \|\psi(x_0,a)(s) - \psi(x_0,b)(s)\| \leq \alpha(\|x_0,a - x_0,b\|)) holds, hence, for all (t \geq 0):

(\|\mathbf{y}_a(t) - \mathbf{y}_b(t)\|) (\quad \leq \max \left(\gamma\left(\operatorname{ess sup}_{x \in [0,t]} w(t-s)\alpha(\|x_0,a - x_0,b\|)\right)\right)), (\gamma(\operatorname{ess sup}_{x \in [0,t]} w(t-s)\|u_a(s) - u_b(s)\|)\big)) (\quad \leq \max \left(\gamma\left(\alpha(\|\chi_{0,a} - x_0,b\|)\right)\right)) (\quad \gamma(\operatorname{ess sup}_{x \in [0,t]} w(t-s)\|u_a(s) - u_b(s)\|)\big)). Without loss of generality, the memory kernel (w) is taken continuous and nonincreasing, so we recover the FM inequality (6), with (\beta(r, t) \triangleq \gamma(w(t)\alpha(r))). (\Box) The purpose of Proposition 8 is primarily rhetorical rather than practical. Although it may be difficult to identify a set (X_0) on which Assumption 1 holds in practice, its (most likely) existence for a well-selected I/O operator realization of the state-space model (3) is sufficient to motivate the (\mathcal{K}\mathcal{L})-dissipation of initial conditions in Definition 2. The reciprocal, however, will turn out to be much more practical, since it allows to access the operator-theoretic approximation theorem of Boyd and Chua [1] from the state-space definition of FM over a whole set of initial conditions. However, once again because of the (\mathcal{K}\mathcal{L})-dissipation of initial conditions, this converse result must be handled carefully. Namely, we need the composition of the inverse map (\psi^{-1}: \psi(\mathcal{X}_0) \to \mathcal{X}_0) with the (\mathcal{K}\mathcal{L})-dissipation (\beta) to itself satisfy a FM inequality. Assumption 2. We assume that there exists a map (\psi: X_0 \to \mathcal{U}^-) such that for all (x_0 \in X_0), the causal and time-invariant operator (G: \mathcal{U} \to \mathcal{Y}) is a ((x_0, \psi(x_0)))-realization of the state-space model (3) considered at (x_0 \in X_0). Moreover, we assume that there exist (\tilde{\gamma} \in \mathcal{K}_\infty) and a memory kernel (\tilde{\gamma}) satisfying Definition 1 such that the following FM inequality holds for all (t \geq 0):

## Page 8

(38) (39) (40) (41) (42) (43) (44) (45) (46) (47) (48) (49) (50) (51) (52) (53) (54) (55) (56) (57) (58) (59) (60) (61) (62) (63) (64) (65) (66) (67) (68) (69) (70) (71) (72) (73) (74) (75) (76) (77) (78) (79) (80) (81) (82) (83) (84) (85) (86) (87) (88) (89) (90) (91) (92) (93) (94) (95) (96) (97) (98) (99) (100) (101) (102) (103) (104) (105) (106) (107) (108) (109) (110) (111) (112) (113) (114) (115) (116) (117) (118) (119) (120) (121) (122) (123) (124) (125) (126) (127) (128) (129) (130) (131) (132) (133) (134) (135) (136) (137) (138) (139) (140) (141) (142) (143) (144) (145) (146) (147) (148) (149) (150) (151) (152) (153) (154) (155) (156) (157) (158) (159) (160) (161) (162) (163) (164) (165) (166) (167) (168) (169) (170) (171) (172) (173) (174) (175) (176) (177) (178) (179) (180) (181) (182) (183) (184) (185) (186) (187) (188) (189) (190) (191) (192) (193) (194) (195) (196) (197) (198) (199) (200) (201) (202) (203) (204) (205) (206) (207) (208) (209) (210) (211) (212) (213) (214) (215) (216) (217) (218) (219) (220) (221) (222) (223) (224) (225) (226) (227) (228) (229) (230) (231) (232) (233) (234) (235) (236) (237) (238) (239) (240) (241) (242) (243) (244) (245) (246) (247) (248) (249) (250) (251) (252) (253) (254) (255) (256) (257) (258) (259) (260) (261) (262) (263) (264) (265) (266) (267) (268) (269) (270) (271) (272) (273) (274) (275) (276) (277) (278) (279) (280) (281) (282) (283) (284) (285) (286) (287) (288) (289) (290) (291) (292) (293) (294) (295) (296) (297) (298) (299) (300) (301) (302) (303) (304) (305) (306) (307) (308) (309) (310) (311) (312) (313) (314) (315) (316) (317) (318) (319) (320) (321) (322) (323) (324) (325) (326) (327) (328) (329) (330) (331) (332) (333) (334) (335) (336) (337) (338) (339) (340) (341) (342) (343) (344) (345) (346) (347) (348) (349) (350) (351) (352) (353) (354) (355) (356) (357) (358) (359) (360) (361) (362) (363) (364) (365) (366) (367) (368) (369) (370) (371) (372) (373) (374) (375) (376) (377) (378) (379) (380) (381) (382) (383) (384) (385) (386) (387) (388) (389) (390) (391) (392) (393) (394) (395) (396) (397) (398) (399) (400) (401) (402) (403) (404) (405) (406) (407) (408) (409) (410) (411) (412) (413) (414) (415) (416) (417) (418) (419) (420) (421) (422) (423) (424) (425) (426) (427) (428) (429) (430) (431) (432) (433) (434) (435) (436) (437) (438) (439) (440) (441) (442) (443) (444) (445) (446) (447) (448) (449) (450) (451) (452) (453) (454) (455) (456) (457) (458) (459) (460) (461) (462) (463) (464) (465) (466) (467) (468) (469) (470) (471) (472) (473) (474) (475) (476) (477) (478) (479) (480) (481) (482) (483) (484) (485) (486) (487) (488) (489) (490) (491) (492) (493) (494) (495) (496) (497) (498) (499) (500) (501) (502) (503) (504) (505) (506) (507) (508) (509) (510) (511) (512) (513) (514) (515) (516) (517) (518) (519) (520) (521) (522) (523) (524) (525) (526) (527) (528) (529) (530) (531) (532) (533) (534) (535) (536) (537) (538) (539) (540) (541) (542) (543) (544) (545) (546) (547) (548) (549) (550) (551) (552) (553) (554) (555) (556) (557) (558) (559) (560) (561) (562) (563) (564) (565) (566) (567) (568) (569) (570) (571) (572) (573) (574) (575) (576) (577) (578) (579) (580) (581) (582) (583) (584) (585) (586) (587) (588) (589) (590) (591) (592) (593) (594) (595) (596) (597) (598) (599) (600) (601) (602) (603) (604) (605) (606) (607) (608) (609) (610) (611) (612) (613) (614) (615) (616) (617) (618) (619) (620) (621) (622) (623) (624) (625) (626) (627) (628) (629) (630) (631)

## Page 9

We now demonstrate a very similar result for our state-space notion of FM using a Lyapunov converse argument. The result is established using techniques similar in spirit to those employed in the proofs that ISS implies exp-ISS or ISDS [28, 29, 26]. However, the incremental nature of the investigated properties necessitates restricting the analysis to a compact subset of the state space. Theorem 4 (Equibounded ( \mathcal{U}^\dagger ), compact ( \mathcal{X}_0 ): ( \textcircled{d} )ISS (\Rightarrow) State-space FM), Let ( X_0 ) be a compact set of initial conditions. If the inputs of ( \dot{x}(t) = f(x(t), u(t)) ) are equibounded and the system is globally ( \delta )ISS, then it has state-space FM on ( \mathcal{X}_0 ). Remark 9. Since a FM inequality holds for all compact sets of initial condition, one can say that the system has semi-global input-to-state FM (Definition 3). Proof. Let ( \mathcal{X}_0 ) be a compact set and let ( M_x > 0 ) be a constant such that for all ( x_0 \in \mathcal{X}_0 ), ( \|x_0\| \leq M_x ). Let ( \mathcal{U}^\dagger ) be equibounded, so there exists ( M_x > 0 ) such that the input signals take value in the compact and convex set ( U \triangleq {u \in \mathbb{R}^{n_x}: \|u\| \leq M_x} \subset \mathbb{R}^{n_x} ) containing the origin. Since the system is ( \delta )ISS, then for ( u \triangleq 0 ) it is ( \delta )GAS, which implies the existence of a unique globally asymptotically stable equilibrium ( x^* ) [4]. Consequently, for all ( x_0 \in \mathcal{X}_0 ), the ( \delta )ISS inequality provides:

\|x(t) - x^*\| \leq \beta (M_x + \|x^*\|, t) + \gamma (M_x) (46) The compact set ( \mathcal{X} \triangleq {x \in \mathbb{R}^{n_x}: \|x - x^*\| \leq \beta (M_x + \|x^*\|, 0) + \gamma (M_x)} ) is such that all state trajectories ( x ) of initial condition ( x(0) \in \mathcal{X}_0 ) remain bounded in ( \mathcal{X} ). The converse Lyapunov result of Theorem 2 provides the existence of a smooth Lyapunov function ( V: \mathbb{R}^{n_x} \times \mathbb{R}^{n_x} \to [0, +\infty) ) such that there exists ( \alpha_1, \alpha_2, \kappa \in \mathcal{K}_\infty ) and ( \rho ) positive-definite satisfying the conditions (45) [2]. According to Theorem 3.6.10 of [38] (see also Lemma A.34 of [39]), there exists ( \alpha_3 \in \mathcal{K}_\infty ) and ( \lambda > 0 ) such that ( W = \alpha_3 \circ V ) satisfies:

\alpha_3 \circ \alpha_1 \big(\|x_a - x_b\| \big) \leq W(x_a, x_b) \leq \alpha_3 \circ \alpha_2 \big(\|x_a - x_b\| \big), \quad (47a) \kappa \big(\|x_a - x_b\| \big) \geq \|u_a - u_b\| \Rightarrow \dot{W}(x_a, x_b) \leq -\lambda W(x_a, x_b), \quad (47b) with \dot{W}(x_a, x_b) = \frac{\partial W}{\partial x_a}(x_a, x_b) f(x_a, u_a) + \frac{\partial W}{\partial x_b}(x_a, x_b) f(x_b, u_b). \quad (48) Let us consider the set ( \mathcal{F} = {(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b): \|x_a - x_b\| \leq \kappa^{-1} \|(u_a - u_b)\| } \cap (\mathcal{X}^2 \times U^2) ) and the function ( \mu_0 ) defined by:

\mu_0(s) \triangleq \max_{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(x_a, x_b, u_a, u_b) \in \mathcal{F}, \|u_a - u_b\|\leq s} \max_{0,0,(\dot{W}(x_a, x_b) + \lambda W(x_a, x_b)),} \frac{(49)}{(

## Page 10

6. FM of the current-driven memristor

As a final application of the state-space notion of FM studied in this paper, we come back to our motivating example, the current-driven memristor, and we exhibit mild assumptions to ensure that it has FM. Proposition 10 (FM of the current-driven memristor), For an equibounded input current I, the internal dynamics (2b) of the memristor has FM from I to x on compact sets of initial conditions if it is globally (\delta)ISS. Moreover, if the input current I is continuous and the memristor M is Lipschitz continuous, the memristor (2) also has FM from I to U on compact sets of initial conditions. Proof. Let (\overline{I} > 0) and (\lambda > 0) denote the maximum of the signal I and the Lipschitz constant of M respectively. Given that (2b) is delay-free, time-invariant, with equibounded input currents, and globally (\delta)ISS, applying Theorem 4 provides the FM of (2b) for equibounded input currents I on the compact set of initial conditions (X_0), thus given a difference of two state trajectories, the following FM inequality holds:

(\|\Delta x(t)\| \leq \beta (\|\Delta x(0) \|, t) + \gamma (\text{ess sup}_{\mathbf{s} \in [0, t]} w(t - s) |\Delta I(s)|)). (58) Given that (2b) has equibounded input currents, (\delta)ISS also implies for all (X_0) compact, there exists a compact (X) such that all state trajectories (x(t)) remain bounded in (\overline{I}X), meaning we can also upper bound (\|M(x(t))\|) by a constant (\overline{M}) for all (t \geq 0). Then, the following inequalities hold:

(|\Delta U(t)| \leq |M(x_d(t))| I_d(t) - M(x_b(t))| I_b(t)|) (59) (|M(x_d(t))| \cdot |\Delta I(t)| + |I_b(t)| \cdot |M(x_d(t)) - M(x_b(t))|) (60) (|\overline{M}|\Delta I(t) + \overline{I} \lambda|\Delta x|). (61) Without loss of generality, we take the memory kernel w with (w(0) = 1), so by continuity of I and w, (|\Delta I(t)| \leq \text{ess sup}_{\mathbf{s} \in [0, t]} w(t - s)\Delta I(s)|). Thus, the memristor (2) has FM from (I(t)) to (U(t)) with (\hat{\beta} \triangleq \overline{I}\beta) and (\hat{\gamma}(r) \triangleq \overline{M}r + \gamma(r)). (\Box) 7. Conclusion & perspectives

This work proposes a formulation of the FM property as an extension of the (\delta)IOS property with an explicit memory kernel, with the aim of promoting FM as a core property of real-life nonlinear systems, much like the convolution property of LTI systems. This formulation bridges the operator-theoretic notion of FM with the incremental stability concepts from state-space theory. Although full equivalence with the (\delta)ISS property does not hold in general, we identified reasonable assumptions where FM can be recovered from (\delta)ISS. The current-driven memristor example illustrates the practical relevance of the framework. For future work, global extensions of Theorem 3 and Theorem 4, eventually for inputs which are not necessarily Lipschitz-continuous and/or equibounded, remain to be found. It would also be valuable to derive practical Lyapunov conditions to guarantee global input-to-state FM. Further applications of FM remains to be explored. In the context of interconnected systems [2]: what can be said about the memory kernel of the interconnection of two FM systems under a small-gain condition? In the context of dissipativity theory [40]: could FM help to reduce the conceptual gap between the non-incremental and the (lack of) incremental properties of memristive systems? It would also be useful to develop a state-space characterization of myopia [41], the spatial counterpart of FM, and to investigate how it can be integrated with the proposed state-space notion of FM for the study of partial differential equations. As a final note, the (L_\infty) fading-norm used to define FM can be substituted by a generic (L_p) fading-norm, which, for (p = 1), creates a bridge between FM and the notion of incremental integral input-to-output stability ((\delta)IOS) worth investigating [3].